Introduction
------------

Montana experiment examines the relationship between political
information and political behavior in non-partisan race. In particular,
this field experiment sends official-looking flyers (titled “2014
Montana General Election Voter Information Guide” with the “seal”) to
voters; these flyers include information about ideologies of candidates
for Judicial race.

This research has some ethical/legal issues: by giving voters
information about candidates’ ideologies, this experiment injects
partisanship into a nonpartisan race. Since judicial races have been
regarded as a way of reducing the excessive influence of politics, such
contamination in the nonpartisan race would undermine the separation of
powers in the constitutional system. Second issue pertains to law. This
research violates election law, in at least two aspects: the use of
state seal and election advocacy. I will discuss about these issues in
detail in the following sections by drawing on Salganik’s principles of
ethics.

Salganik’s principles
---------------------

Respect for Persons
-------------------

The first principle focuses on the autonomy: letting people control
their lives. Intervening in people’s lives without consent would violate
this ethical principle. Thus, at face value, the Montana experiment
seems like an obvious transgression of such principle: researchers’
treatment lacked any explicit consent; even the researchers misled
voters by making the treatment official-looking.

Explicit violations notwithstanding, we should understand this issue
from more general contexts: does this experiment undermine autonomy? It
is true that the treatment would potentially change voters’ behaviors
without their knowledge. However, if we understand autonomy as comprised
of *well-informed choices reflecting one’s preferences*, giving
individuals information about candidates’ ideologies would actually
enhance their agency, unless the information is biased. Seen this way,
this experiment contributes to a political marketplace where individuals
can autonomously elicit assessments of ideal candidates who would best
represent their own preferences. Thus, the *treatment was, in some
aspects, rather conducive to autonomy, contributing to a more reasoned,
rational decision-making.*

To conclude, though it would have been better if researchers deployed
some other strategies which do not violate subjects’ autonomy (which
will be discussed in detail in the last section), but the research might
actually be conducive to political autonomy in some aspects.

Though the measurement has vindicated its validity (Bonica 2013, 2014),
providing candidates’ ideologies alone might be understood in a
distorted way by voters—it’s a too simplified information. I’ll discuss
some ways to ameliorate this issue in the last section.

Beneficence
-----------

Beneficence principle concerns balancing the benefits and harms of
experiment. Thus, to evaluate Montana experiment against this standard,
we should first understand the impact (both harm and benefit) of it.

The core impact of this research is that *it affected the political
landscape and individuals’ behaviors.* Someone may argue that
influencing the political reality via experiment itself is a “harm,”
distorting the “real” public opinion. This argument assumes that
election should represent mass publics’ preferences per se. *However,
the key question in this issue is not whether the experiment actually
influenced or not; but whether how, to what end, the research influenced
the election.*

Against this background, we can assess the benefit and harm of the
experiment in various levels.

1.  Individual level: the potential harm field experiment might cause to
    individuals is *informational risk*, where the disclosure of
    personal information harms individuals. However, no such harm is
    found in this experiment. Another potential harm concerns
    manipulation—providing the ideologies of candidates might alter
    individuals’ behaviors. However, information is, if not biased, a
    public good; providing information to individuals would help them
    reason their way out to a more informed decision. Thus, the research
    does not engender severe harm to individuals.

2.  Community level: we should consider *both participants and
    non-participants*, for the provided information might be circulated
    across the public via political communication: consequences of the
    experiment would not be limited to the subjects—the experiment might
    influence the entire local political landscape, leading to more
    partisan and heated election, yet with more turnout. This issue
    touches on a more fundamental issue: are partisan elections bad?
    Partisan elections are more polarized; but, they also garner more
    public attention; they make more people participate in the political
    process and interested in politics. Seen this way, it is hard to
    conclude that the harm outweighs the benefit.

3.  Social level: one may argue that injection of partisanship into
    nonpartisan elections, the guardian of separation of powers, is
    itself a problem. However, we should consider the definition of
    nonpartisan elections: they are the elections *where political
    parties don’t directly engage in nominating candidates; it doesn’t
    mean they are not partisan.* Rulings are necessarily political, and
    the judges have political ideas to base the ruling on; thus,
    elections are open contests of conflicting ideologies. Ideologies
    and partisanship give voters shortcuts to navigate the political
    world. Overlooking the ideological properties of elections, and
    thereby having an election without such information, wouldn’t make
    an ideal election—it would be less conflictual, but also less
    meaningful.

Thus, the fact that this experiment influences individuals, community,
and society does not mean that it violates Beneficence principle: we
should consider the ways in which the experiment affects the electoral
process. Such consideration should take into account democracy, party
system, and public opinion, which makes it harder to make a clear-cut
standard. *Considering such complexity, it is hard for me to argue that
the experiment violated Beneficence principle.*

Justice
-------

The third principle concerns the distribution of burdens and benefits.
Thus, to evaluate the “Justice” principle, we should first understand
who suffers and benefits. Participants don’t bear obvious costs of the
research, as mentioned above. Candidates might benefit or suffer if the
research influences election results; however, if the election results
are reversed because proper information was given, then such results are
in fact beneficial to the public. Thus, this research does not
significantly transgress the principle of Justice, *unless the treatment
is randomly distributed*: since the treatment would encourage voting, if
the distribution of treatment is not balanced, then it will distort the
election, by encouraging a certain group of people to vote.

Respect for Law and Public interest
-----------------------------------

This experiment clearly violates the respect for law: the flyers
intentionally put on “state seal”, which requires permission of the
secretary of state. Such transgression misled mass public, by making
them believe that the treatment was something official. Also, while this
experiment amounted to election advocacy, from Motl’s ruling, they did
not disclose all spending and contributions under the state’s campaign
laws.

Further questions
-----------------

Random sample or not (Q2 and Q3)
--------------------------------

Since this research assumes that informing candidates’ ideology
influences voting behavior, unequal sampling may manipulate the
electoral process. If the sampling is biased towards Democrats, which
was the case, Democrats would benefit from the election, whereas
Republicans would suffer a loss. This would violate *the “Justice”
principle*, for the benefits and the drawbacks of the experiment are not
fairly distributed. It might also undermine the *Beneficence principle*,
for the research does a severe harm—it explicitly encourages one side of
the party to vote, leading to overrepresentation in the election. I
mentioned above that *altering the election results itself does not
amount to transgression: however, manipulating the election to one
party’s benefit does.*

Close contested election or not (Q4, Q5)
----------------------------------------

Since the experiment is conducted on a not closely contested election,
the impact of the research could have been minimized. While I argued
that affecting elections itself does not amount to ethical misconduct in
theory, but there are potential problems in affecting the political
reality. There is no harm in being careful, and minimizing the impact of
the experiment on elections would obviate unnecessary controversial
ethical and legal issues.

CrowdPAC (Q6)
-------------

Taking into account the fact that not only the researcher is a
co-founder of a for-profit startup, but also that the methods this
research draws on are directly related with the company, the ethical
issues become clearer, by adding one important factor into the equation:
private interest. Now, new question is whether this research was not for
public good, but for the for-profit startup getting publicity. Such
explicit conflict of interest would negatively influence the ethical
evaluations.

Suggestions (Q7)
----------------

Against this background, I propose some changes to address those ethical
issues. First, I wouldn’t mislead people into believing the flyer as
official. The state seal, and the official-looking titles are
unnecessarily causing ethical and legal issues. Instead, I would clarify
that the mails are sent by universities. Since the goal of the research
is to find the relationship between information and political behavior,
this change would not compromise the quality of the experiment. All that
flyers have to do is to deliver the information properly, and the
university’s prestige would in fact do a better job, considering the
high public mistrust in government.

I would also give voters more information about the methods. The flyers
only show the location of candidates along ideological spectrum, which
might be translated arbitrarily by voters. (1) At least some explanation
of the measurement would give voters better information, which might
have less dramatic, and less distorted impact on voters. Also, (2)
providing more information about candidates (e.g. dispositions towards
various political and social issues) might make the treatment less
simplifying, and thereby less controversial or partisan.

Finally, since the experiment was conducted without voters’ knowledge, a
post-hoc debriefing would ameliorate its ethical issues.
