-   [Part 1. The four principles.](#part-1.-the-four-principles.)
-   [Part 2. What if there was random
    sampling?](#part-2.-what-if-there-was-random-sampling)
-   [Part 3: Non-random mailer](#part-3-non-random-mailer)
-   [Part 4: Not a close election](#part-4-not-a-close-election)
-   [Part 5. Not close at al.](#part-5.-not-close-at-al.)
-   [Part 6. CrowdPac](#part-6.-crowdpac)
-   [Part 7. How I would do it.](#part-7.-how-i-would-do-it.)

Part 1. The four principles.
----------------------------

The 2014 Montana election survey is ethically problematic based on the
four principles outlined by [Salganik
(2017)](http://www.bitbybitbook.com/en/ethics/ethics-activities/). By
sending a mailer to over 100,000 Montana voters which observed how
liberal or conservative leaning non-partisan Supreme Court candidates
were, the researchers overlooked various issues with the ethics of the
project.

### I. Respect for persons

The first ethical guideline Salganik mentions is respect for persons.
Taken generally, this is respecting the autonomy of people taking place
in a study. It is respecting their boundaries both in entering the
experiment and in how they treated within the experiment.

This can be implemented in various ways. First, participants have to
give informed consent for entering a study. That is, they have to
clearly understand all the ramifications of a study before entering into
it. If deception is used as part of the study, then they must be
notified at the end for how they were manipulated. Second, in instances
when people have reduced autonomy, such as children or the mentally ill,
they have to be given additional protections either by being excluded
from the study or by taking extra care not to unduly harm them.

The researchers did not fulfill these obligations. First, the
participants did not give consent, informed or otherwise, before mailing
the letters. That is, in no way could participants decide to be part of
the study. Although they were mailed an apology after the government
took this to be illegal lobbying, it did not fulfill the requirement for
autonomy. Secondly, Those with reduced autonomy were likewise given no
protections, as some mentally ill adults could have been swayed by the
campaign literature due to their diminished capacity.

### II. Beneficence

In the second criteria, beneficence looks at reducing harm and risk as
well as maximizing the benefits of a study. This assumes that risks
cannot be completely eliminated so the goal of research should be to
maximize the possible benefits, not just in terms of the knowledge
gained but also to the participants involved.

Here, the harms seem to outweigh the risks. The researchers sent mailers
which show how liberal or conservative candidates are, relative to Obama
and Romney as presidential candidates. This design is internally
problematic which leads to ethics problems: comparing political views to
a candidate relies on the salience and popularity of those candidates.
Saying, for instance, that a candidate is "as conservative" as Mitt
Romney has a different connotation than saying they are "as
Conservative" as Ronald Reagan, in that the popularity of the
presidential candidate will affect the popularity of the Supreme Court
candidate. Given the precariousness of candidate popularity, this can
mobilize voters to prevent candidates with unfavorable comparisons from
winning.

Likewise, since the researchers are targeting a statewide election in a
small state, over 100,000 mailers could significantly sway what was a
turnout of over 630,000 voters. Such a swing is harmful because it
directly changes a political outcome. There is also little benefit to
this research because, even if the design was not overly salient,
finding out how an obscure state election went does not have enough
insight to outweigh the costs of swinging an election. Thus, the
benefits for participants are virtually few and the harms, in terms of
saliently loaded information and an election swing, are great.

### III. Justice

The third guide is justice, or the idea that the risks are fairly
distributed among the population. It is essentially, a way of preventing
a marginalized group from taking on all the risks, in the way for
instance, African Americans did in the Tuskegee experiment. Likewise,
studies are also encouraged to reach out to minority populations for
beneficial treatments so that they are represented for things like drug
trials.

This study is more mixed when it comes to the criteria of justice. The
researchers mostly gave out mailers to liberal and centrist (or
democratic leaning) participants rather than send out a random sample.
This creates an interesting dynamic, on the one hand, minority voters
are more likely to vote for democrats and thus it would actually
increase their participation in the election, which might be a benefit.
However, on the negative side, this might favor one political group over
another which, regardless of minority voting, would be very unjust.

### IV. Respect for law and Public Interest

Possibly the most blatant ethical violation was in respecting the law
and public interest. Put simply, this is not breaking laws when
conducting research, it also involves looking out for compliance issues
such as unknowing violations of website terms of service.

Here the authors seem to be in clear violation of this because the
county's commissioner said the law was broken and that they should be
prosecuted for violating campaign laws. While I believe there was not a
conscious attempt to campaign for any candidate, authorities can, and
did, think there were reasons they did (such as mailing more letters to
democrats). In this case, insofar as the authorities of Montana are
concerned, campaign laws were broken thus making it violate this
standard.

Part 2. What if there was random sampling?
------------------------------------------

If the letters were sent randomly, this could affect the outcome of the
election in various ways. Here the baseline demographics of the voters
matter, that is, what parties most people in the state belong to. If,
for instance, Democrats and Republicans are relatively equal in
proportion of registered voters, than it has little to no effect on the
voters and is highly unlikely to swing the election. However, if there
is a large disparity in registered voters (or if one party dominates
voter registration), then it could create a swing for the
underrepresented party.

This is because while the mailers are randomly sampled, the distribution
of party members are not. A randomly sampled mailer (which is likely to
be equal) will advantage, or at least compensate, the party which is
underrepresented by informing their voters of the election and possibly
prompting them to vote in greater numbers. Thus, random sample can both
bias and have no effect on state outcomes.

Part 3: Non-random mailer
-------------------------

The study not being a non-random makes me more suspicious of the
research design; this has the potential of skewing the election results
much worse than a random sample. First, the authors mention that
democrats tend to have lower turnout means suggests they are almost
trying to affect the result since there is no statistical reason to
increase turnout. In a turnout of over 630,000, there are plenty of
democratic voters to observe statistical inference even if only a small
fraction of them voted. That is to say, the differences from previous
elections, even if the turnout is inherently smaller, could be observed
without a non-random mailer.

Part 4: Not a close election
----------------------------

That the election was not close makes the research somewhat ethically
better since it is unlikely that even a non-random mailer can skew the
outcome of the election. However, it still raises the other ethical
issues before such as beneficence and respect for persons, as well as
the research design requiring more democratic voters get mailed when
there is no statistical reason for it.

Part 5. Not close at al.
------------------------

This again makes it better ethically (assuming this landslide for both
candidates is true of previous years as well) because it is very
difficult to swing the election. Calculating all the people who received
the mailers, even there were an extra 64,265 democratic votes (assuming
the winners were both republican-leaning judges) then neither of the
candidates would have won. However, even if in this case it was an
unlikely election to swing, I do not believe it should not be a general
practice because of the possibility of unforeseen political changes. If
there is an unexpected change in the results, then small factors such as
a mailer could swing that election.

Part 6. CrowdPac
----------------

One of the principal investigators being a co-founder of CrowdPac is a
huge conflict of interest. Although unmentioned this is true in this
case, the Pac has a financial interest in certain candidates winning and
some judges could have been candidates that the Pac supported and thus
had an incentive to benefit with this study. That is, the study might no
longer have been objective in how it was run but rather overtly trying
to benefit a candidate.

Part 7. How I would do it.
--------------------------

If I were a principal investigator and wanted to experimentally study
information on nonpartisan elections, there are many changes I would
have made. First I would have tried to remove Adam Bonica so that his
ties to CrowdPac would not have influenced the study in any way.

Secondly, I would choose a state-wide election from a state with an
especially large population such as New York or Texas. This large
population size would ensure that the over 100,000 mailers would have
virtually no chance to swing the election. Likewise, because of the
large sample size, there would still be significant external validity
that could be drawn from the study. Third, I would make sure that the
nonpartisan election, in addition to being in a very large state, would
also be one which is very unlikely to be close. This large advantage
would prevent the possibility that the election swings and that the
study would have an effect.

When it comes to sampling the mailers, I would specifically have the
parties of the people mailed match party voter registration percentages
in the state. While this would not be random, it would match the
political demographics within the state and thus prevent the possibility
that random sampling also increases the activation of an
underrepresented political party. Finally, the data I send would be more
objective in how it presents the political views of candidates. I would
either not use salient political figures at all, or, if I did use them,
would only have those with high national approval ratings so that there
would be no political mobilization to try to prevent a candidate who was
compared to an unpopular figure.
